---
layout: post
title:  "Rebuilding the Front LCA"
date:   2017-05-25
parts:
  - cost: 100
    descr: used front lower control arm
  - cost: 100
    descr: 2x front lower ball joints
  - cost: 30
    descr: ES polyurethane LCA bushing
---

My front-left lower control arm was slightly bent, causing the car's wheel to
be shifted about 0.5-1" forward in the wheel well. Instead of just replacing
the bent arm, I decided to get a used arm and rebuild both front arms with new
bushings and ball joints. A single new OEM arm was over $350 (CAD), while
buying used and rebuilding **both** arms was less than $250. The downside to
rebuilding the arms is that you have to use poly bushings. Nissan didn't make
these arms rebuildable, expecting shops to replace the entire arm.  This means
they don't sell replacement rubber bushings for them, so you're stuck using
Energy Suspension's replacements.

Anyways, here is the "after" shot of one of the LCAs:

![rebuilt LCA]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/rebuilt_lca.jpg)

Here are a few notes about this process, for those that happen to stumble upon
this post and are thinking about doing the same thing...

First and foremost if you are doing this by hand, the ball joints are a pain in
the ass and more time consuming than you think they'll be. Stripping and
painting the LCAs is time consuming. Seriously consider just [buying the Z1
upgraded LCAs](https://www.z1motorsports.com/suspension/z1-motorsports/upgraded-oem-300zx-lower-control-arms-p-7011.html)
which are well worth the price, given the labour involved.

Still here? OK - by the end, I had to "rent" (free of charge) the
following tools from Canadian Tire:

 * ball joint press (comes with 3 cups),
 * master ball joint press kit (all sorts of cups and adapters), and
 * 5T gear/pulley puller.

All in, this is about $500 worth of tools that Canadian Tire let\'s you borrow
for free (with deposit). If you don't have access to these tools or the ability
to borrow them for free, then it probably makes sense to just buy new
arms. You'll also need a breaker bar to get the ball joints in and out.

![balljoints are in]({{ site.baseurl }}assets/images/rebuilt_lca_balljoints.jpg)

I opted to burn the bushings out. For those who are thinking about doing this,
I'd highly recommend this method if you also plan on painting the arms. It took
about 1-2 minutes per arm with a propane torch. The only reason to
drill/saw/whatever it out is if you don't want to paint the arms. You WILL need
eye protection. That melting rubber really loves to just spit and pop. To get
the bushings out, ust keep heat on the outer bushing sleeve and move it around
so it heats up evenly. Do NOT let the rubber catch fire. If it catches fire,
just blow it out and keep going. You want to liquify the rubber, not burn it.
Burning it just creates a lot of smoke, throws black, stinky ash everywhere,
and will piss off your neighbours. If you see the rubber lip on the outside
start to come off, just stop and rip it off so it doesn't catch fire. For the
first LCA, once the inner sleeve started moving up a little bit and I could
noticably see the liquified rubber, I just grabbed some big pliers and yanked
it out. For the 2nd one, the bushing actually just popped out after about a
minute (and shot some rubber out too, so be careful - eye protection, long
sleeves).

You'll need to remove the cone-shaped seats on top of the ball joints. These
are pressed on when you install the ball joint. They are not easy to remove. I
ended up having to rent a pulley puller to remove these. They're really tiny
though, so the puller kept slipping off when I'd tighten it. I ended up having
to just wrap the puller in duct tape to keep it from sliding off. This worked
like a treat though and got both off easily.

Once the arm is disassembled, I'd suggest first painting the bottom, pressing
the ball joint in, and then masking the ball joint and painting the top.
Otherwise the ball joint press is just going to fuck up your lovely paint job,
like it did mine.

![balljoints are in]({{ site.baseurl }}assets/images/rebuilt_lca_painted.jpg)

When pushing the inner metal sleeve into the polyurethane bushing, the bushings
will start pop back out. I got around this by throwing a couple zip ties around
the bushing/arm, through the inner sleeve. As I pushed the bushing in, I'd
tighten up the zip ties, which held the bushing in place. Then I just cut the
zip ties as I was pushing it up into the bracket under the car.
